like Oh what you doing here?
NOTE CONF
That OK.
Thanks for coming and for those who haven't yet come
NOTE CONF
or have decided not to come, please make it a
habit to come to the lectures.
NOTE CONF
It will help you, not me.
I assure you that it gives you the discipline to
NOTE CONF
go through the lecture in the first attempt.
Come and clarify anything during the help desk sessions, do
NOTE CONF
some self-study and do the labs.
That's the most optimal way of um solving this unit.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh, unit on, uh, algorithms and data structures.
NOTE CONF
OK, we're gonna talk about Boommore algorithm primarily, time permitting.
I'll cover Knuth Morris Pratt.
NOTE CONF
Kruthnor Morris Pratt is a, is of historical importance.
The real-world algorithm is Boymore for exact pattern matching.
NOTE CONF
We saw how we could use Z preprocessing last week
to convert into a pre-pro uh into an exact pattern
NOTE CONF
matching problem.
Where we want to find all instances, all occurrences of
NOTE CONF
a pattern in text, and we saw that you could
do it in a linear time, worst case.
NOTE CONF
But then what Booor allows you to do is essentially
do this on average in super linear time, N over
NOTE CONF
M.
Worst case, it's still N + M, but on average,
NOTE CONF
you kind of get enormous saving.
Um, given the properties of the, uh, input strings, especially
NOTE CONF
on natural languages, uh, when you do a control F
on your browsers, the internally there is an exact pattern
NOTE CONF
matching that defaults to certain optimised implementations of BoMO.
What we'll be learning.
NOTE CONF
Is how to do this using Z algorithm, which is
actually the modern treatment of the problem.
NOTE CONF
So just to recollect where we were at at the
start of last lec um last week's week's lecture, I
NOTE CONF
motivated you that naive does.
Comparisons of text with pattern at every position and when
NOTE CONF
it does not match, it shifts by one and repeats.
So a lot of unnecessary things that go on in
NOTE CONF
naive comparison.
Now what we covered last time was that we'd want
NOTE CONF
to shift more than one, more aggressively, more purposefully.
And when we shift, we don't want to miss the
NOTE CONF
mathematical guarantee that we have never skipped over an instance
accidentally.
NOTE CONF
So we want to shift safely but also where possible
purposefully and aggressively.
NOTE CONF
So that's the agenda of uh Boyer Moore uh implementation
and even Knuth Morris Pratt.
NOTE CONF
So we'll start with Boyo More.
Now, it defines the standard benchmark for string pattern matching.
NOTE CONF
When you're pre-processing the pattern, so the idea is to
pre-process the pattern, and no matter what text you get,
NOTE CONF
you're able to use that, whatever you've pre-processed to go
and search for it, search for instances of the pattern
NOTE CONF
in the text.
Now, There are 3 main ideas.
NOTE CONF
Actually, the idea is very simple, very intuitive.
If you pay attention to this and and interact with
NOTE CONF
me while we're going, it'll be the, it'll be the
easiest for you to understand it.
NOTE CONF
Obviously, the devil is in the detail.
When you go and talk to the computer, not to
NOTE CONF
a human being, that's when you have to crystallise your
understanding.
NOTE CONF
I already said that a computer is the best bullshit
detector that human beings have created.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the whole idea is to sort of get
the higher idea, see if you can, um, master it
NOTE CONF
in a few iterations, and then see if you can
convince a computer that you've understood it.
NOTE CONF
So that's the pathway.
So there are three main ideas that we're going to
NOTE CONF
use.
One is this weird thing called right to left scanning.
NOTE CONF
We'll explain that.
There are some data structures that it'll uh Biomode will
NOTE CONF
use, and they're really about implementing what I will call
the bad character shift rule or bad character shift function,
NOTE CONF
and I'll explain what it is, and then later on
we'll talk about another sort of shift function called good
NOTE CONF
suffix shift function.
We'll, we'll try and tease out what these bad and
NOTE CONF
good is.
So, first idea, I'm just giving you the overview.
NOTE CONF
Follow carefully.
So I'm going to draw the text as 1 to
NOTE CONF
end, that's this line.
So text is always of size N.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to use the symbol N for the length
of the text.
NOTE CONF
Now, pattern is of size M.
in some iteration.
NOTE CONF
You are positioning the pattern 1 to M under some
region of the text of the same length of the
NOTE CONF
pat as, as the pattern.
So if the region starts at J in the text,
NOTE CONF
where does it end?
This is of size M J + M minus 1.
NOTE CONF
Start point plus length minus 1 gives you the endpoint.
This has got nothing to do with zero-based or 1-based,
NOTE CONF
just that if the index starts at J, if there
are m characters, the end has to be at the
NOTE CONF
position j + m minus 1 inclusive J2 J plus.
A minus 1.
NOTE CONF
Now, the first idea, right to left scanning is it
the normal way we tend to compare is to compare
NOTE CONF
the J character with the first J + 1 with
the second until there's a mismatch, right?
NOTE CONF
I mean, that's what we would do if you're writing
a naive algorithm.
NOTE CONF
But here, the The comparison is in the opposite or
the reverse order.
NOTE CONF
So M is compared with J + M minus 1.
M Mth character in the pattern is compared with the
NOTE CONF
last character in that region in the text that it's
currently opposing.
NOTE CONF
Then if that matches the penultimate characters get matched, and
this right to left scanning proceeds from the end of
NOTE CONF
the pattern and its opposing character in the text, all
the way towards the start, and two things can happen.
NOTE CONF
At some point, when you keep comparing.
All these, let's say, matched.
NOTE CONF
And then at some point you might have Um, A
character that did not match.
NOTE CONF
OK, so that, that could happen, right?
So when you're right, when you're comparing from right to
NOTE CONF
left, that comparison stops because there was a mismatch at
some position.
NOTE CONF
Now, the character in.
Oh, sorry, I should have.
NOTE CONF
You should have asked me that.
OK.
NOTE CONF
All I have done was there's a text 1 to
N, pattern 1 to M, and right to left scanning
NOTE CONF
is scanning from the end of the pattern, comparing against
the opposing character in the text in that region backwards.
NOTE CONF
At some point, let's call that position K.
At position K in the pattern, if the opposing character
NOTE CONF
in the text and the pattern mismatched.
Then X is called the bad character.
NOTE CONF
It's called a bad character for that iteration.
So the notion of bad and good is a function
NOTE CONF
of the iteration that you're doing it.
When you're doing a right to left scan at some
NOTE CONF
every iteration, you're doing right to left scanning.
And if your scanning stops at some some position K
NOTE CONF
in the pattern, it's opposing symbol in the text.
That is a bad character.
NOTE CONF
It's intuitive that it's bad in the sense that it
did not let me continue the scanning all the way
NOTE CONF
to the start, right?
So there are some iterations when you never find a
NOTE CONF
bad character.
When, when is that?
NOTE CONF
Is that obvious?
When won't you find a bad character when you're scanning?
NOTE CONF
When the pattern matches that region in the text.
OK, so know that bad character is defined when you
NOTE CONF
do not find an instance of pattern in the, in
the text when you're comparing that region in that iteration,
NOTE CONF
if there was this right to left scanning aborted because
you found a bad character in the text that stopped
NOTE CONF
that scanning to go further along, then.
X would be that bad character, whatever character there is
NOTE CONF
at position K in the pattern opposing that would be
um the bad character.
NOTE CONF
Now what is the good suffix?
Well, really, everything that you have matched.
NOTE CONF
Before Is a suffix of the pattern, isn't it?
K + 1 to this position part of K +
NOTE CONF
1.
2 Is good suffix.
NOTE CONF
For that iteration.
So every iteration When you end up Having a mismatch
NOTE CONF
defines a bad character and a good suffix.
When you find the pattern occurs in that region.
NOTE CONF
You don't have a bad character, the good suffix is
the pattern itself, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Everything matched.
OK, just keep in mind.
NOTE CONF
Now, with those things, the general idea, the general idea
of, uh, boy a more, I'll just bring the slide,
NOTE CONF
don't worry about the letters, we'll just explain the intuition
here.
NOTE CONF
The idea would be when.
Uh Text and pattern are given to you, or let
NOTE CONF
me actually write it the other way, pattern and text
are given to you as input.
NOTE CONF
Pattern is of length M, text is of length N.
You do a preprocessing step, so you preprocess.
NOTE CONF
Just the pattern.
You don't care about what text it is, and you
NOTE CONF
create.
Three data structures, one that supports back character shifting.
NOTE CONF
What does it mean?
It is shifting, taking into evidence that the bad character
NOTE CONF
in the text is some letter X.
We will describe all that in detail, but at a
NOTE CONF
higher order, when you pre-process it, you, you, you create
data structures.
NOTE CONF
So these are data structures.
That help bad character shifting.
NOTE CONF
Another thing which is which supports good suffix shifting.
And then I will, as we go along, there will
NOTE CONF
be something called a matched prefix shifting as a special
case.
NOTE CONF
In fact, one special case is when you find the
entire pattern match a region, you're shifting using matched prefix
NOTE CONF
shifting because good character is sort of the idea of
good character is a bit pointless there.
NOTE CONF
The whole suffix, the good suffix is the pattern that
matched that region.
NOTE CONF
And there's another place where you use that match prefix.
So you can think of match prefix to be a
NOTE CONF
special case of good suffix, OK?
So if, however you do, yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Using all three of those simultaneous.
I will explain how it's going to be used as
NOTE CONF
we chug along.
So just, um, so we're going to use them, how
NOTE CONF
the mechanics of how they get used is slightly something
that we will talk about as we, as the slides
NOTE CONF
chug along.
Now, so this is a pre-processing step.
NOTE CONF
Then after the pre-processing step would be the search phase.
So search phase where you are starting.
NOTE CONF
The pattern You're aligning 1 tom of the pattern with
1 to M of the text, the first region, do
NOTE CONF
right to left scanning.
And then you pay attention to, so if, if you
NOTE CONF
have everything matched, if let's say the pattern occurred at
that position, you're shifting using match prefix.
NOTE CONF
If it isn't, there is some bad character and some
good suffix that's defined, and you're shifting using.
NOTE CONF
The best of these two, I'm giving you a higher
level idea.
NOTE CONF
We'll look at the mechanics later.
So we're shifting when you say we're shifting, you're shifting
NOTE CONF
pattern rightwards by one or more positions.
The whole idea is to be able to shift purposefully
NOTE CONF
and safely, right?
The two sort of guarantees that we want to have
NOTE CONF
is our shift is purposeful.
We are really purposeful about our shift.
NOTE CONF
And while doing so we are safe.
Even if the the lower-level details are not clear, is
NOTE CONF
there any part that you didn't understand so far?
Any questions?
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
Continue What is the shifting for?
NOTE CONF
The shifting is essentially saying that the problem is to
find all instances of the pattern in the text.
NOTE CONF
So, let's say, in the first iteration, you have either
found or not found the pattern in some region.
NOTE CONF
You have to shift safely so that you encounter the
remaining patterns, uh, uh, instances of the pattern in the
NOTE CONF
text.
The shifting is really about trying to explore the entire
NOTE CONF
text.
Now think about what you end up doing.
NOTE CONF
You have, you open a browser with some, uh, PDF
file, thousands of pages.
NOTE CONF
They are, they are really texts in one dimensional sense,
right?
NOTE CONF
You're seeing it formatted in that way, but internally it's
a one dimensional string, the representation.
NOTE CONF
And when you say control F some search, you'll see
something light up on your, on your search bar.
NOTE CONF
It is all the instances of that word which it
is trying to search when you do a control F.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, so that's exactly what's happening.
With this algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Now, So, I'll just now with some, some context, we
will go through um The slides, I'll keep going back
NOTE CONF
and forth from the board and the slides.
So, right to left scanning, I've already mentioned in this
NOTE CONF
example, there's some silly example here, where B matches with
a B, A matches with an A, Y matches with
NOTE CONF
a Y.
I'm just saying, I'm starting in some middle, some intermediate
NOTE CONF
position.
I'm not starting from the first iteration.
NOTE CONF
I'm just giving you a sense of what, how a
standard right to left scanning looks like.
NOTE CONF
And then this, the next character B does not match
with B, so by definition, In this example, B is
NOTE CONF
your bad character, and YAB is your good suffix.
Are the definitions clear?
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Alright, so.
NOTE CONF
What is the bad character shifting?
We'll just talk about the bad character shifting.
NOTE CONF
Well, to, to do, to come up with a bad
character shift function, you compute this array of rightmost values
NOTE CONF
of any letter in the alphabet.
OK?
NOTE CONF
So what it's saying is that when you define a
string.
NOTE CONF
There is some implicit alphabet.
It could be ASCII 7-bit or 8-bit or UTF 8.
NOTE CONF
So every all computer languages, when you encode stuff is
using some alphabet, right?
NOTE CONF
So in this example, I'm, I'm assuming that the alphabet
is lowercase uh Roman A to Z, right?
NOTE CONF
So If you have an alphabet at A to Z.
Then, and a pattern that's coming from this Roman alphabet
NOTE CONF
or English alphabet, A to Z.
Now, what this array, R of X, I'm, I'm wanted
NOTE CONF
you to see it as a function, but in a
programme, it's an array, right?
NOTE CONF
R square brackets of X or the index associated with
a specific letter in the alphabet.
NOTE CONF
It is the first letter in the alphabet or the
second letter in the alphabet, the third letter in the
NOTE CONF
alphabet, and so on.
But if this function.
NOTE CONF
will return the rightmost occurrence of every letter in the
al alphabet as seen in the pattern.
NOTE CONF
So now, if the alphabet A to Z.
A appears in this pattern twice at position 3 and
NOTE CONF
position 6.
So R of A is storing 6, the rightmost occurrence
NOTE CONF
of A in that pattern, right?
We are preprocessing only the pattern.
NOTE CONF
In the pre-processing step, you don't care about the text,
you only care about the pattern.
NOTE CONF
Now Any questions so far?
Now, the next letter in the alphabet is B, not
NOTE CONF
the, not the pattern, alphabet is A, B, C, D,
all the way to Z.
NOTE CONF
The next letter in the alphabet is B.
How many times have I seen B?
NOTE CONF
So what is the rightmost occurrence of B in, uh,
in this pattern?
NOTE CONF
I've seen B at position 2 and position 7.
The rightmost would be 7.
NOTE CONF
This is, I'm using one-biased indexing, you can correct it
for zero-based when you're writing a programme.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
See, have I seen a C in the pattern?
NOTE CONF
There are no, there's no C in the pattern.
So because I'm using one-based indexing, I can use 0
NOTE CONF
to mark the fact that the, the rightmost occurrence of
C in the pattern is at position 0 because 0
NOTE CONF
does not have any meaning in one-based indexing, yeah.
You have to correct us for Um, you can't use
NOTE CONF
0 in 0-based.
0 has a meaning, right?
NOTE CONF
Um, and if you would, and it's not clear how
these numbers come about.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone have any doubt about how those numbers come
about?
NOTE CONF
What would be, if you have no doubt, also think
about what would be the most efficient way of Computing
NOTE CONF
that array.
Anyone?
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
Uh, making an array where each character is an intake
NOTE CONF
into it and just go through the pattern and every
time you see a character update the value of that
NOTE CONF
character.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
So what would be the complexity of that approach?
Um, So it would be all of m plus the
NOTE CONF
alphabet size because you still have to create an array
of alphabet size.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely, yeah, so I should have clarified.
I knew that you knew that just wanted to say
NOTE CONF
that.
So the whole idea would be you create an alphabet,
NOTE CONF
um, sized array whatever initialise them to um uh zeros
in one base indexing.
NOTE CONF
Scan from left to right on the pattern.
Every time you see a letter, you, you register the
NOTE CONF
position.
If a letter appears multiple times because you're going from
NOTE CONF
left to right, you'll always overwrite it with the rightmost,
at the end of it, you will have the right
NOTE CONF
most for every letter.
OK, so that's a very simple um processing.
NOTE CONF
Now, let's formalise it intuitively.
So text and pattern in some region J to J
NOTE CONF
+ M minus 1, I've seen on the board.
Now, If you have found a mismatch at position K
NOTE CONF
in the pattern, meaning that there's some position K in
the pattern which mismatched with the opposing symbol in the
NOTE CONF
in the text in that region.
Where the others all match, the green part is a
NOTE CONF
good suffix, you're not worried about good suffix, you're only
worried about bad character here.
NOTE CONF
So the bad character is X.
Now, what you're trying to say is what is the
NOTE CONF
rightmost occurrence of X in this, Pattern, and if you
have pre-processed for every possible character, for any iteration you
NOTE CONF
have a back character, you can look up that table
and say what, where is the rightmost occurrence of that
NOTE CONF
back character in my pre-processed array, is that correct?
Now, if I did that.
NOTE CONF
What would I get?
Let's say X was pointing to that position somewhere.
NOTE CONF
Now, what would be the most obvious thing to do?
To ensure that the exs line up in the next
NOTE CONF
shift, and my question before I, you ask a question,
I ask a question, why is that safe?
NOTE CONF
Intuitively Because in in entire there's no more.
There's no more X between.
NOTE CONF
That position That position There's no more X between that
position.
NOTE CONF
The, the rightmost X is that you are ensuring that
you're lining those X's up after shifting.
NOTE CONF
So, after shifting, the X's have lined up.
Now I'll take your question.
NOTE CONF
You had a question.
OK, sorry.
NOTE CONF
I thought you had your hand up, so.
So, um So the whole idea would be to line
NOTE CONF
this up.
Now, there is one wrinkle in this reasoning.
NOTE CONF
What is it?
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
What if the rightmost X is to the right of
NOTE CONF
K or greater than K?
If R of X is greater than K or greater,
NOTE CONF
is that reasonable?
RFX can't be equal to K.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree?
Why Because it's a mismatch, right?
NOTE CONF
We define a bad character by a mismatch.
So if it is greater than K, then If If
NOTE CONF
that was your um.
If that was your RFX, so let's pretend this didn't
NOTE CONF
exist, and that was RFX position that you have stored.
If you want to line up X's, you're travelling in
NOTE CONF
the wrong direction, aren't you?
You're shifting the pattern backwards, not forwards.
NOTE CONF
You only want to keep gaining ground under the text,
rather than concede ground under the text, right?
NOTE CONF
So there is this wrinkle with the standard bad character
rule where if you find that RF X is not
NOTE CONF
less than K, or rather RFX is greater than K,
you obviously cannot go backwards.
NOTE CONF
You will have to default to what a naive shift
would be, would do, which is shift by 1.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
So, the idea would be to say that if my,
NOTE CONF
my, if I, if you were writing it into a
programme, you write it as if RFX is less than
NOTE CONF
K, shift by how many positions.
It says there on the screen, but how many, how
NOTE CONF
do I reason this intuitively?
So how do I know with this um With this
NOTE CONF
instance, if RFX was less than K.
I have to line this up.
NOTE CONF
How do I line this up?
Joined by So This position is the character of that
NOTE CONF
region.
Now our effects should be under it.
NOTE CONF
So you just have to reduce the gap between K
and R of X, which is K minus RF X,
NOTE CONF
right?
So that's what you're doing, where you're shifting by K
NOTE CONF
minus R of X, which is closing the gap after
shift.
NOTE CONF
Now, depending on what that RFX is, you could potentially
have a shift of 1 or 2 or 3, or
NOTE CONF
what have you.
Now, what happens when.
NOTE CONF
X was not found in.
The, um, in the pattern.
NOTE CONF
It, you have an aggressive shift which is still safe,
OK?
NOTE CONF
Is everyone clear?
OK, very nice.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's a simple bad character rule.
Now, here's, let's do some example here.
NOTE CONF
So we're, we're going to start with iteration one.
I've changed the pattern slightly, so it, it's just an
NOTE CONF
example, so it doesn't matter, we don't have to stick
to the same thing.
NOTE CONF
So, whatever um we have used previously, the pattern is
slightly changed.
NOTE CONF
So don't get flustered if you see the pattern changing.
So in the first iteration, you're aligning 1 to M,
NOTE CONF
which is M equals 7, the pattern size is 7.
You're comparing 1 to 7 with 1 to 71 to
NOTE CONF
7 in the text with 1 to 7 in the
pattern.
NOTE CONF
You're doing a right to left scan.
The very first character that you're matched is a mismatch,
NOTE CONF
isn't it?
So, good suffix length would be.
NOTE CONF
Null, good suffix has a length of 0, so it's
a null is uh um 0 is correct.
NOTE CONF
So it's a good suffix would be of length 0.
The bad character here would be character Y.
NOTE CONF
Now.
Did he say why it is why?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it's all good.
Uh, any questions?
NOTE CONF
No.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So, It is Y.
So look up the table that you've preprocessed.
NOTE CONF
It's at position 5.
The rightmost occurrence is at position 5.
NOTE CONF
So in my next shift, you want to shift by
7k, which is the position of mismatch minus RFX.
NOTE CONF
K was 7, RFX was 57 minus 5 is 2.
So you're essentially shifting this 12 positions.
NOTE CONF
That means that once you shift this, you will see
that.
NOTE CONF
T is now a pattern is two positions downstream under
the text.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Everyone clear there?
NOTE CONF
Now, rinse, repeat.
Every iteration starts with a right to left scanning.
NOTE CONF
B matches with a B, A matches with an A,
Y matches with a Y.
NOTE CONF
You again have a mismatch in this iteration.
The back character is B, B is 7, the sorry,
NOTE CONF
the rightmost occurrence of B is 7.
So that's basically the rightmost occurrence of B is 7.
NOTE CONF
So, you are to shift by.
Can you, can you shift by K minus RFX?
NOTE CONF
No, you can't because you have this, you have to
shift by negative values.
NOTE CONF
So what you have to do is shift by 1.
In that case, because you're doing maximum of 1, K
NOTE CONF
minus RFX.
If K minus RFX is negative, it will default to
NOTE CONF
1.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
That's the idea, uh, involved in this.
Um, out here again, next iteration, so you're kind of
NOTE CONF
shift by one.
So if you just see that character has shifted by
NOTE CONF
one.
Uh, pattern is shifted by 1.
NOTE CONF
Now you have a new back character, which is A,
A is at position 6, like most occurrence, so K
NOTE CONF
is 7, RFX is 67 minus 6 is 1.
It turns out that you're using back character, it turns
NOTE CONF
out to be still a naive shift because of the
Um, the instance of the pattern that you're dealing with,
NOTE CONF
and then this process keeps repeat, OK, that this is
useful.
NOTE CONF
So when you shift by one, when you start the
next iteration, you're doing a right to left scanning, the
NOTE CONF
very first character that you're matched was a mismatch.
The back character is C.
NOTE CONF
Have I seen a C in, uh, anywhere?
Well, C RFX would have been initialised to 0 in
NOTE CONF
one-bi indexing, so 7 minus 0 would be 7.
So you're shifting by 7 positions, 123456.
NOTE CONF
The next instance that the pattern starts, you get an
aggressive jump, and then.
NOTE CONF
And this is what a bad character shift is.
Now at this stage.
NOTE CONF
I just wanted to say that the shift function is
suggesting how many positions to shift by, and back character,
NOTE CONF
the standard back character shift function will give you a
suggestion, and that suggestion will be safe.
NOTE CONF
Always going to be safe, OK?
You'll never have to worry.
NOTE CONF
We'll have to reason in the labs that, um, a
test is not a proof.
NOTE CONF
We'll have to prove this a bit more, um, elegantly.
In fact, one of your lab questions, which will be
NOTE CONF
open, I think it, it'll uh set the model to
unhide the lab sheet for next week.
NOTE CONF
We do, you prepare this week for, for the content,
and next week you go and do the lab.
NOTE CONF
It will have these questions to prove this much more
formally, and they'll, we'll, we will introduce to you, try
NOTE CONF
to make an attempt, but we'll introduce to you a
proof by contradiction.
NOTE CONF
Which is a form of proof that will help you
sort of see that if you proof by contradiction is
NOTE CONF
that if you assumed that you missed something you reach
a contradiction based on the definition of these shift functions.
NOTE CONF
OK, don't worry about the formal proofs as yet intuitively.
Uh, convince yourself that this kind of shifting is safe.
NOTE CONF
Now we still have other forms of shifting to think
about and where all this fits into the jigsaw, but
NOTE CONF
I just want to propose that there is a slight.
Dissatisfaction if he left the back character shift function in
NOTE CONF
the standard form because you already identified what happens when
RFX is greater than K, OK, so you really are
NOTE CONF
interested in the rightmost.
Instance of a back character to the left of position
NOTE CONF
K, isn't it?
Every time you have, uh, you're interested in it for
NOTE CONF
let's, let's take a let's take an abstract view.
Let's say this region all matched, and then the back
NOTE CONF
character was X, and there were the 1st instance, the
2nd instance, the 3rd instance, the 4th instance of X's.
NOTE CONF
Now the standard bad character rule will store the position
of the 4th instance in that example, right?
NOTE CONF
It will always store the rightmost, but really what you
want would be the rightmost to the left of.
NOTE CONF
OK Now, what you could do is, rather than pre-process
just for the bad character, you could pre-process for this.
NOTE CONF
Extended that character shifting data structure, which takes into account
positions as well, the variability of positions.
NOTE CONF
Rather than just the variability of the alphabet, so the
two things that are varying, the two degrees of freedom.
NOTE CONF
So in any iteration, that character itself can change.
And in any iteration, the bad character will be at
NOTE CONF
some position between 1 and M.
It could be 1 or 2 or 3 or 4
NOTE CONF
or 5 all the way to M.
So.
NOTE CONF
What could you do?
Any thoughts, comments?
NOTE CONF
What could you do to come up with an extended
data structure, pre-processed, even before you saw the, saw the
NOTE CONF
uh text, just on the pattern.
What could you do to account for a variability of
NOTE CONF
both in the bat character and in the position?
Let's see if others uh wanted to say.
NOTE CONF
I'll come back to you in a bit.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Did you just store the position of all the bad
characters.
NOTE CONF
Can you, can you, so back character is a function
of the text, not the pattern.
NOTE CONF
So when you are doing a pre-processing, all you have
is a pattern.
NOTE CONF
What do you want to store?
All the positions of X.
NOTE CONF
At every position.
So I think you're on track.
NOTE CONF
I think if I, if you gave yourself some time,
you would come up with the data structure for each
NOTE CONF
position within the packet, the right character.
But, but that's variable, right?
NOTE CONF
You don't know which character it is, so there's two
degrees of freedom.
NOTE CONF
I think you're saying that for each position, every possible
letter's rightmost position, um, to the left of that that
NOTE CONF
position K.
So you want to find the rightmost occurrence of, of
NOTE CONF
each character to the left of every possible position K
in the pattern.
NOTE CONF
Now let's actually look at an example.
Let's take a look at this example.
NOTE CONF
I've just skipped over slides, but don't worry, I've there,
I'll just go back and connect it.
NOTE CONF
So, So, uh, just in case, so what I've, what
I've done is here, you want to shift so that
NOTE CONF
it is the rightmost occurrence of X, the bad character
to the left of K, which is the third instance
NOTE CONF
of, um, of X in that example, in that illustration.
So you essentially are going to line up those two.
NOTE CONF
OK.
This would have been the shift if you did the
NOTE CONF
standard back character, uh, rule, which will shift by 1.
But if you were doing, um, the extended back character
NOTE CONF
rule, you'd be aligning by K minus RK X.
There are two degrees of freedom.
NOTE CONF
You could have written this as a two-dimensional array, K
and X.
NOTE CONF
A function taking two arguments, K, X.
So now you have a function that's taking two arguments,
NOTE CONF
two degrees of freedom, a K and an X.
You have to preprocess it, and the preprocessing would be
NOTE CONF
fairly standard.
Let's actually, I've skipped over one slide, but we'll connect
NOTE CONF
it in a bit.
So just take a look at this two-dimensional table where
NOTE CONF
the rows are the number of is correspond to the
number, uh, uh, the position in the pattern.
NOTE CONF
So it goes from 1 to rows, go from 1
to 71 to M in general.
NOTE CONF
The columns go from the first letter to the last
letter of the alphabet.
NOTE CONF
So what is this story?
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
To my left Each of those characters.
So a row, each index to the left is a
NOTE CONF
row.
Is it A?
NOTE CONF
Is it B?
Where does A appear right most?
NOTE CONF
Where does B appear right most?
To the left, to, to the left of each position,
NOTE CONF
right?
So let's actually do this, um, in some standard way
NOTE CONF
so.
So if you are at position.
NOTE CONF
Um, one, OK, one base indexing.
What would be the leftmost, um, what would be the
NOTE CONF
rightmost occurrence of any character to the left of one?
They'll have to be all zeros undefined in one bias
NOTE CONF
indexing.
Now let's take just focus on 11 letter A.
NOTE CONF
it can be any letter, but let's focus on A.
So what would be the, um.
NOTE CONF
Rightmost occurrence of A to the left of one.
0, what would be now I shift to the next
NOTE CONF
position.
What would be the rightmost, I'm doing column wise rather
NOTE CONF
than row wise, what would be the rightmost occurrence of
A to the left of 2, position 2.
NOTE CONF
What would be the rightmost occurrence of A to the
left of 3, not at 3 to the left of
NOTE CONF
3.
It has to be 0.
NOTE CONF
What is the rightmost occurrence of A to the left
of 4?
NOTE CONF
It has to be 3 because A is at that
position now.
NOTE CONF
What would be the rightmost occurrence of A to the
left of 5.
NOTE CONF
It continues to be 3, rightmost occurrence of A to
the left of 6 is 3.
NOTE CONF
Rightmost occurrence of A to the left of 7 would
be 6 because A appears at less than um less
NOTE CONF
than K, right?
So A is uh you have to always include that
NOTE CONF
value for less than K, not less than or equal
to, OK.
NOTE CONF
All other columns are exactly the same drill.
OK.
NOTE CONF
And I claim that this can be.
This whole thing can be done in um.
NOTE CONF
Bigger of M times the alphabet size, and I want
you to think a bit if you were to, you
NOTE CONF
know what, how to construct, you know, at least what
the meaning of that array is, how would you go
NOTE CONF
and construct requires some amount of thinking.
So I leave that thinking.
NOTE CONF
So what I'm going to do is, it is simple
enough, it's so simple enough for a 3rd year student
NOTE CONF
to think, think a bit without hand holding, holding, and
then see if they can come up with a solution.
NOTE CONF
If not, come to the help desk and then we'll
sort it out, OK?
NOTE CONF
Um, so you could construct the, the two-dimensional table.
So this is basically a two-dimensional table.
NOTE CONF
You can think of this to be that way.
OK, um, and And one thing I want to do,
NOTE CONF
I want you to do while you're thinking is, if,
uh, um, uh, before I jump ahead, if I have
NOTE CONF
a table like this, a table of size M times
the alphabet size, pattern length times the alphabet size have
NOTE CONF
been successfully able to pre-process the table of that size.
In any iteration, I will have a back character, and
NOTE CONF
I'll have a position.
K.
NOTE CONF
In any iteration, I'll have K and a back character
when a back character exists.
NOTE CONF
Then what would be the retrieval time to look up
this table?
NOTE CONF
K of one time.
So you have an 01 look up into the stable
NOTE CONF
to find out K gives me the row.
X gives me the column.
NOTE CONF
You just do a random axis to that element because
it's a two-dimensional table, nice and proper, so you can
NOTE CONF
essentially zero in on each value while you're shifting.
So it's the same drill.
NOTE CONF
You don't have this pathology of max of 1, K
minus RX that we kind of.
NOTE CONF
Had this function where if it was greater than k
then we had to default to 1 to shift by
NOTE CONF
1 that you don't have to have that pathology anymore
if the extended bad character because for every k it
NOTE CONF
will it'll give you the rightmost occurrence of the bad
character to the left of a position.
NOTE CONF
Now my claim also is in your free time or
in your study time that you actually can compute.
NOTE CONF
A data structure, a data structure, not the rectangular one.
In O of M + sigma space plus, not into.
NOTE CONF
Now, I want you to see how you can achieve
that.
NOTE CONF
It's a, it's a lab question too, so you'll have
one week to think about it.
NOTE CONF
In general, if you have a solution, don't post it
publicly, um, because I want others to think as well.
NOTE CONF
And the process is not to get there first, the
process is to understand somehow, OK?
NOTE CONF
So you can post it privately to me and I'll
give you a nudge or a suggestion that you're on
NOTE CONF
the right track or not, but in general, for lab
questions next week, don't post it publicly.
NOTE CONF
I mean, this is really to help others, OK?
You'll get all the brownie points from the teaching team,
NOTE CONF
and once it's over, I'm quite happy to uh make
it public.
NOTE CONF
Solutions would be released anyway at the end of each
week's lab, so you can check it out.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, so, so if we have, what I wanted to
convince you now is that if we had nothing else,
NOTE CONF
if we had nothing else, then you could just use
bad character shifting, either extended or standard.
NOTE CONF
You would still, on average, get a super linear time,
N over M speed up, just by bad character alone.
NOTE CONF
You don't, in fact, we could have stopped the discussion
here.
NOTE CONF
But computer science is not about just stop, stopping at
the first, um, thing that, that works.
NOTE CONF
Can we squeeze the juice out of this, um, shifting
a bit more, OK?
NOTE CONF
Uh yes, sir.
The good substitute and improvement or or.
NOTE CONF
It's an alternative.
There is a variation which is called a strong good
NOTE CONF
suffix rule, which is, which we don't worry, worry about
it, but I'll say it because you asked it.
NOTE CONF
There is a strong good suffix rule which combines both
bad character and good suffix into one, but that's it,
NOTE CONF
by the way, um, the algorithm evolved, it's basically had
two shift functions, so I'm keeping to that logic.
NOTE CONF
So what we are going to do now is to
do the shifting using the good suffix as the evidence.
NOTE CONF
So previously we did shifting with the bad character as
our objective, right?
NOTE CONF
Everything was res respect to the bad character.
Now we want to do it with good suffix as
NOTE CONF
the evidence.
Now Think about You in any iteration want to decide
NOTE CONF
how many positions to shift by.
Your goal is to shift aggressively, and goal is to
NOTE CONF
shift safely.
We sort of intuitively understood that the bad character, extended
NOTE CONF
or standard, is a shift that potentially makes purposeful aggressive
shifts and is safe.
NOTE CONF
What if there is an alternative shift function, good suffix
shift function.
NOTE CONF
Which also gives a suggestion, shift by a certain number
of amounts and is also safe.
NOTE CONF
Now you have two choices.
Choice A, bad character shift.
NOTE CONF
Choice B, good suffix shift.
Choice A says shift by some some number of positions.
NOTE CONF
Choice B says shift by some number of positions.
You are a rational human being, a rational human being.
NOTE CONF
What would you choose?
Two people having opinions.
NOTE CONF
You take the largest of the two, right?
You take the largest of the two.
NOTE CONF
So the idea would be that now we're going to
talk about good suffix shifting.
NOTE CONF
It'll suggest us to shift by some amount.
Previously, bad character sets shift by some amount.
NOTE CONF
Good suffix will also make a suggestion once the once
the answers are there.
NOTE CONF
You take, you're the chair of the committee of two
experts.
NOTE CONF
Expert one says shift by 5 positions.
Uh, the next expert says shift by 7 positions.
NOTE CONF
Both are honest, trustworthy experts.
You trust them both, but your goal is to get
NOTE CONF
things done fast.
You'd say, I'm going to choose the expert that gives
NOTE CONF
me.
The most aggressive shift.
NOTE CONF
So that's the agenda.
Next.
NOTE CONF
So good suffix shift is quite simple.
OK.
NOTE CONF
The, the logic is very, very simple.
It's the implementing it.
NOTE CONF
With Z algorithm, it's easy once you get it.
And by the way, without that algorithm, when the algorithm
NOTE CONF
was first published, the jump tables, the jump functions for
good suffix had an inefficiency.
NOTE CONF
Which the Z algorithm, because of the nature of the
Z algorithm makes it Go away.
NOTE CONF
OK, so what is a good suffix shift?
I zoomed in, OK.
NOTE CONF
So text.
You are comparing.
NOTE CONF
Maybe I will use the same colour pattern.
So that's J.
NOTE CONF
J + M minus 1.
1 and M.
NOTE CONF
You do a right to left scanning.
So K + 1 to M all matched.
NOTE CONF
And let's call the, the suffix of pattern.
K + 1 to M.
NOTE CONF
As alpha, some.
Label alpha.
NOTE CONF
Now At position K, there was a mismatch.
Maybe I'll draw it slightly bigger.
NOTE CONF
That's the text.
That's the pattern.
NOTE CONF
That's one.
Now What the good suffix is trying to do is
NOTE CONF
it's saying, can I preprocess the pattern before even seeing,
before doing any.
NOTE CONF
Uh, comparison searching.
Can I preprocess the pattern?
NOTE CONF
To explore for any K, so where K is a
mismatch, K + 1 to M defines a good suffix.
NOTE CONF
The, OK, I'll, I'll pause what the function is.
I'll come back to that statement.
NOTE CONF
I'm, I'm stopping it because I want to make this
intuitive.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume that the pattern had 3 other instances of
alpha.
NOTE CONF
At position P1, position P2, position P3.
When I say 3 other, there's definitely an instance of
NOTE CONF
alpha as a suffix of the pattern, right?
Now, let's say there are 3 other instances.
NOTE CONF
Which would be the safest shift to make?
The right Let's go with the new one.
NOTE CONF
I'll come back to you.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The leftmost one, so which would mean B1 OK.
NOTE CONF
That's 11 suggestion, you had a right most, which would
be what?
NOTE CONF
P3, P3 was a suggestion was P1, a suggestion was
P3.
NOTE CONF
Which one anyone?
Any votes for P2?
NOTE CONF
OK OK, How many would venture a guess it's P1?
Raise your hands.
NOTE CONF
OK.
You've changed your mind?
NOTE CONF
OK, you've changed your mind.
What have you changed it to?
NOTE CONF
P3.
OK.
NOTE CONF
How many would think it would be P3?
OK, that's an overwhelming, uh, number.
NOTE CONF
Why is that safe?
Because if I close the gap between.
NOTE CONF
After shifting, if I ensure that They're not proportional.
The boxes are sort of off in size, but you
NOTE CONF
get the idea, right?
So you're shifting such that this box comes under that
NOTE CONF
region in the, in the text.
Now, Why is that the safest?
NOTE CONF
First thing, you have to, you're shifting by what?
let's look at if you're, this shift will be shift
NOTE CONF
by what?
If this is M, this is P3, how many positions
NOTE CONF
have I shifted here?
M minus P3.
NOTE CONF
Why?
Because I've closed up.
NOTE CONF
The end of this box has to be the end
of this box after, um, after I've shifted.
NOTE CONF
Well, it is really closing up the gap between M
and P3, which is going to be a minus P3.
NOTE CONF
Now, Of all the choices I had, M minus P3
was a choice that we sort of intuitively correct, but
NOTE CONF
let's reason this.
The other option was M minus P2, the other option
NOTE CONF
was M minus P1 in in this example, right?
So M minus P3 would be the most conservative shift.
NOTE CONF
It would be, you understand why it's conservative, the smallest
gap, so to speak.
NOTE CONF
Now, anything else aligned, if I shifted by lesser amount
than M minus P3.
NOTE CONF
Because I'm I'm going to force, let's say I've shifted
such that some region aligns under alpha.
NOTE CONF
After shift it will be a mismatch, right?
One or more characters in that region will be a
NOTE CONF
mismatch.
What you're ensuring is that after shift, the alphas have
NOTE CONF
to match in the next iteration, right?
So you're essentially trying to do a shifting where.
NOTE CONF
You want to find um.
The rightmost occurrence.
NOTE CONF
Of the good suffix.
In fact, you want to find the end point of
NOTE CONF
the rightmost occurrence of the good suffix.
End point is P 3.
NOTE CONF
Alpha ends in P3, yeah.
So we had alpha ending in P1 here, ending in
NOTE CONF
P2 here, ending in P3 here.
Here, K1 K K + 1 to M would be
NOTE CONF
a good suffix.
You're saying, find me the rightmost occurrence of another instance
NOTE CONF
of this good suffix alpha, that is rightmost in the
pattern, that's not itself.
NOTE CONF
Obviously, alpha would be the rightmost, right?
Another instance other than alpha, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Other than the suffix.
The rightmost is basically ending at P3.
NOTE CONF
Now, by the way, I'm going to ask a question.
If I'm going to put some letters here.
NOTE CONF
Um So we're only looking at alpha, OK?
If I, would you still want to shift so that
NOTE CONF
P3 now occupies the, so, so that the third instance
of alpha lines up?
NOTE CONF
If I had, if I had characters before alpha as
Y in the 3rd, before the 2nd instance of alpha
NOTE CONF
as A, before the 1st instance of alpha as B,
which one do I shift by if I did not
NOTE CONF
know anything else except for.
Alpha And perhaps I know X and Y, because that's
NOTE CONF
what I've done in right to left scanning.
I've scanned, I know alpha, I know X.
NOTE CONF
I know the mismatched character in the pattern was Y.
Now it turns out that If you still choose the
NOTE CONF
same choice, the 3rd instance.
Know that now you will have a Y, which is
NOTE CONF
the same as this, so in the next iteration, it
is bound to be a mismatch again at that position.
NOTE CONF
Because while doing this, you knew that this character was
Y, the bad character was an X.
NOTE CONF
A strong good suffix rule will say find me an
alpha with X.
NOTE CONF
What was the bad character preceding it.
But if you want to do it in a slightly
NOTE CONF
weaker way, but still ensuring that it is better than
shifting, um, shifting.
NOTE CONF
Alpha preceded by a Y.
So alpha preceded by a Y is ignored.
NOTE CONF
If you want to make sure that you want to
shift such that there is some character.
NOTE CONF
There's some character not equals Y.
So you're not shifting to an alpha with preceding a
NOTE CONF
Y, you're shifting to a position where alpha is preceding
some character, not equals Y in that iteration, OK?
NOTE CONF
So, just want to give you a sense of this.
I'll bring, bring up, um, so, um, the motivation of
NOTE CONF
the good suffix rule, I've already told you that if
you were doing bad character shifting.
NOTE CONF
Um, for this back character B, you have to shift
by 1 because R of B is greater than that
NOTE CONF
position K equals 8.
If you're using the extended back character shifting, you would
NOTE CONF
be shifting by 2 because B, the rightmost occurrence of
B to the left of, um, of that would be
NOTE CONF
the position 6.
So you're shifting so that, uh, you shift by 2
NOTE CONF
will give you, um, the choice there now.
If you're doing uh good suffix shift, you want to
NOTE CONF
find out if you can do, you can beat that.
Question is, it's not always true that you would beat
NOTE CONF
that is can we beat that uh suggestion by the
back extended back character rule is what the motivation of
NOTE CONF
good suffix.
I've already mentioned this.
NOTE CONF
So what you're trying to do here is look at
the alphas.
NOTE CONF
The alpha here in this example is ABA.
You're looking for an instance of alpha.
NOTE CONF
Such that it's not preceded by the same letter as
the good suffix.
NOTE CONF
So good suffix is preceded by C.
Here it is alpha preceded by some other letter.
NOTE CONF
So that's the question mark is basically saying it is
any letter but not the letter which triggered a mismatch.
NOTE CONF
That's the most commonsensical thing to do.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So there are two things here.
So these green boxes are the same, this is same
NOTE CONF
as this is what that first statement is.
And this character preceding them are different is the second
NOTE CONF
statement.
That's all I have done in mathematics, OK?
NOTE CONF
With that symbols.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So if I have this, I can then shift if
I have a way of telling for any position.
NOTE CONF
K, where I have a mismatch.
What is the good suffix of K + 1?
NOTE CONF
Why am I saying good suffix of K + 1?
Because good suffix starts at K + 1, ends at
NOTE CONF
the uh at M.
I don't have to remember the end because it always
NOTE CONF
ends at M.
So good suffix of K + 1, if I say
NOTE CONF
it is at some position P, what does that mean?
It means that if I have.
NOTE CONF
If I have a pattern 1 to M, And the
good suffix K + 1 to M is that.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I'm calling it K + 1 because I'm
using the same symbol K as the position of mismatch.
NOTE CONF
OK, I could have called it a good suffix of
I where I to M is my definition of a
NOTE CONF
good suffix.
I'm just keeping to the symbols that we have used
NOTE CONF
previously.
So if good suffix of K + 1 is P,
NOTE CONF
it basically says that at position ending at P, there
is the same.
NOTE CONF
Alpha, and that would be the rightmost.
Instance of that alpha.
NOTE CONF
Uh, right, right most other instances of alpha, OK?
So rightmost instance, which is not itself, rightmost instance, so
NOTE CONF
either the P, this alpha ends there, such that The
characters here preceding them are different.
NOTE CONF
There are different characters preceding them.
Now This is sort of should motivate, it should ring
NOTE CONF
a bell with.
That algorithm.
NOTE CONF
That algorithm seems to have a relationship with the prefix.
Where it is, what is, what is ZI value?
NOTE CONF
What is ZI value?
Let me just turn on the document camera.
NOTE CONF
So what does, um, What does uh Z I freeze?
OK.
NOTE CONF
So if this is position I, I'm just going to
call it I like that, capital I, Roman I.
NOTE CONF
Um, What does ZI give you there?
The amount of matches.
NOTE CONF
So it is the substring starting at I.
That matches the prefix such that the characters.
NOTE CONF
On This seems to be similar but not quite.
It says it is the rightmost occurrence, which is there's
NOTE CONF
no rightmost here in ZIE definition.
It's the rightmost occurrence of.
NOTE CONF
The substring, which is a suffix, so it's the relationship
between a substring and the suffix, and it is not
NOTE CONF
talking about starting it, it's talking about ending it, and
that has to be right most of them.
NOTE CONF
So there's some hope about getting the right most if
you sort of thought about it correctly.
NOTE CONF
What could we do to the definition?
What variation should I do to Zi?
NOTE CONF
Um, to, to sort of get closer to the goal
of computing it.
NOTE CONF
I know some of you have said yes, but I'm
just looking for other participants.
NOTE CONF
Feel free to jump in.
OK, I'll go with one of you.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, you want to go first?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So So you, you really don't want the relationship between
some starting at some position with the suffix.
NOTE CONF
What if you reverse the string?
Now, you have Z suffix values.
NOTE CONF
That are now thinking about strings in the reverse direction.
Now it's saying it is the substring ending at I
NOTE CONF
that matches the suffix.
Can you see that all by reversing it, the relationship
NOTE CONF
has become with respect to the suffix rather than the
prefix.
NOTE CONF
So if I reverse the string and computed the Z
values and reverse the values back again, so the, the
NOTE CONF
num numbering has to be consistent with the original string,
right?
NOTE CONF
12345678, all the way to M.
If you reverse it, it'll basically be 1234 in the
NOTE CONF
reversed order.
So you'll compute it in the reverse order, you get
NOTE CONF
Zi values in the reverse order, you have to reverse
them back so that it's consistent because it's now your
NOTE CONF
relationship between.
So now what you can do is, if you go
NOTE CONF
back to This Will it automatically go away?
No.
NOTE CONF
Oh, OK, good.
Now For any input, so this is pre-processing for any
NOTE CONF
pattern 1 to M.
If you computed Z suffix of I values, and let's
NOTE CONF
say some of these, I'll just take one instance, I'll
just give you an instance here.
NOTE CONF
Let's say that.
There were 3 Positions P1, P2, P3.
NOTE CONF
That all match the suffix of that same length.
So this alpha matches the suffix of the pattern.
NOTE CONF
This alpha matches the suffix of the pattern.
And that's why Z suffix.
NOTE CONF
Of P1 will store what?
What does a Z Value store.
NOTE CONF
No, it's the length, isn't it?
It's the length of alpha, right?
NOTE CONF
So, Z suffix of P1 will be alpha, Z suffix
of P2 would be alpha.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume Z suffix of P3 would be alpha, meaning
the length of alpha.
NOTE CONF
They all suggest that there's a suffix of length.
Of that, of that length.
NOTE CONF
Maybe we'll call that length L maybe, which is because
we can say suffix of length L, which Matches ending
NOTE CONF
at P1, ending at P2, ending at P3, OK.
Potentially get an information from that.
NOTE CONF
Which one do I have to store as a good
suffix?
NOTE CONF
Value associated with alpha.
Good suffix of what index.
NOTE CONF
And what value?
I want to find out the right endpoint of the
NOTE CONF
rightmost occurrence of any possible good suffix, and I'm I'm
making you a concrete suggestion that let's assume that a
NOTE CONF
good suffix was alpha, sum of length L, and you
saw three other positions in the um in in that
NOTE CONF
pattern where Z suffix values ending at these positions would
be.
NOTE CONF
and we know how to compute these Z suffix values.
You just have to reverse the pattern, send it through
NOTE CONF
Z algorithm which you learned last week, and then it
gives you an array of Z values.
NOTE CONF
Now if you reverse them back, you basically get Z
suffix of values.
NOTE CONF
So there are two reversals that you have to do.
OK?
NOTE CONF
Think about it.
But if the values are given, and we saw the
NOTE CONF
scenario, you have to from this compute a Z suffix
value.
NOTE CONF
What would that be?
Sorry, uh, good, good suffix value.
NOTE CONF
What, what would be the position?
What would be the value that you're assigned to?
NOTE CONF
If that's what you saw, there are 3 instances of
alpha, the good suffix is alpha of length L.
NOTE CONF
So that's of length L, dots of length L, dots
of length L.
NOTE CONF
Each of them matches.
The suffix.
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
Thank Uh, did you say?
NOTE CONF
Lent Plus one, you say?
OK, I'll help you think this through.
NOTE CONF
Let's forget about this for a moment.
Let's forget about this.
NOTE CONF
Let's focus on this question mark.
I want to find out good suffix of alpha.
NOTE CONF
I know that alpha matches the suffix.
This alpha matches the suffix, this alpha matches the suffix.
NOTE CONF
I know this alpha ends at M.
Where does it start?
NOTE CONF
M minus + 1, yeah.
So this would be.
NOTE CONF
M minus.
And what would that value be?
NOTE CONF
Will be What are you storing, the endpoint of the
rightmost occurrence of alpha?
NOTE CONF
You'll have to store P3.
Now, I did not ever bother checking if the previous
NOTE CONF
characters were the same or different.
Why?
NOTE CONF
Because I computed this using a Z algorithm.
So if I did this comparison, these characters would have
NOTE CONF
to be different, yeah.
So that comes out in the wash.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to do anything extra when you're doing
a Z algorithm that the preceding characters, if the character
NOTE CONF
here is some X, this character cannot be X, this
cannot, cannot be X, this can't be, can't, can't be
NOTE CONF
X.
That's by definition.
NOTE CONF
That's by how you by construction that is guaranteed.
Now with that prelude, I'll just go back to sort
NOTE CONF
of The um All displays.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So we are taking computing Z suffix of 5 values.
Now, Z suffix is basically the definition is saying that
NOTE CONF
it's a relationship.
Of any substring ending at some position matching the suffix,
NOTE CONF
that's what this fuss is out this definition of Z
suffixes, which is exactly what Zi values are, except that
NOTE CONF
you have reversed the pattern, run a Z algorithm, and
reversed back the Z ray that it returns.
NOTE CONF
Now, you can compute Z suffix of i values in
OM time.
NOTE CONF
Is that true?
Why?
NOTE CONF
Why is that the case?
Anyone, you wanna try?
NOTE CONF
Which is, what's the complexity of reversal?
Linear OM, then you compute Z algorithm which is linear,
NOTE CONF
and you reverse back the ZRA which is linear, linear
in M.
NOTE CONF
So all of them would be linear in M.
So you compute those, those things.
NOTE CONF
Now once you do that, You would want to find
out the rightmost occurrence, um, uh, the, the end point
NOTE CONF
of the rightmost occurrence of the good suffix, such that
the suffix instance matches and the preceding letters are different.
NOTE CONF
That's what we have explained in that intuitively.
Now let's pair this is Gus Field's genius, the real
NOTE CONF
algorithm.
To compute Z, Z, um, uh, sorry, good suffix is
NOTE CONF
that logic.
It's really a loop with a single line in it.
NOTE CONF
You can't get better than such compact code.
I'll explain what the code is.
NOTE CONF
I've already explained intuitively.
So what you're doing is, first things first, you have
NOTE CONF
some function that computes the Z suffix of I values,
OK?
NOTE CONF
What does the function do?
Reverse the pattern, compute Z runs that algorithm.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to write a Z algorithms in the
opposite direction.
NOTE CONF
You have a Z algorithm in week one.
It is a canned library, it's a built-in library for
NOTE CONF
you now, Z Z algorithm.
You just have to reverse the uh pattern, run Z
NOTE CONF
Z algorithm.
It gives you the array of Z values, but they'll
NOTE CONF
be in the opposite order.
So you have to reverse back that array of Z
NOTE CONF
values so that now they are coherent to the pattern
1 to M.
NOTE CONF
Now, what that will give you is Z suffix of
I values.
NOTE CONF
What you're doing here is, so let we call M
is the length of the pattern.
NOTE CONF
I initialise a good suffix array from 1 to M
+ 1.
NOTE CONF
I'll talk about why you have an extra element M
+1, OK?
NOTE CONF
You don't need that extra element.
If you have that extra ele element, you don't have
NOTE CONF
to do if else conditions.
Conditional branching is avoided.
NOTE CONF
OK, I'll, we'll explain what that, what that means in
a bit.
NOTE CONF
But what you're doing is you're initialising this thing to
all zeros in zero-biased indexing.
NOTE CONF
So they're all 0s, initially.
So all this part is initialization.
NOTE CONF
You've computed Z suffix of I values.
Out here, you have initialised the good suffix at A
NOTE CONF
to 0.
Now, let's stare at that loop and appreciate its beauty.
NOTE CONF
It's a million dollar.
I mean, it's beautiful.
NOTE CONF
You can't get a computation more beautiful than this, yeah.
So it is looping P.
NOTE CONF
P is a loop variable.
Um, maybe I'll go to You're leaving at the wrong
NOTE CONF
time, but up to you.
Uh, it's a P that's basically going from left to
NOTE CONF
right.
Now, at some position, let's say that P equals P1
NOTE CONF
on this on this board, what would.
Line 8 compute.
NOTE CONF
Does it look like this?
The index So When P equals P1, it has seen
NOTE CONF
a Z value ending at P1 of length L, because
you've already computed Z suffix of Pi at every position.
NOTE CONF
Now you're saying, if I've seen a Z, uh substring
of length L ending at P1, that matches the suffix,
NOTE CONF
then where does the suffix start?
Well, it starts at M minus the length plus 1,
NOTE CONF
that's what it's storing there, right?
J equals M minus length, Z suffix of that position
NOTE CONF
plus 1.
And then it's saying Write the value initially to P1,
NOTE CONF
when P equals that position.
At some stage it'll do something else.
NOTE CONF
Other possible values of Z uh Z suffix, it comes
to P2, you say what is run through the loop
NOTE CONF
again, J equals M minus Z suffix of P, which
is now pointing to.
NOTE CONF
Z suffix of P2, which is also L.
So now it will, for the same position, M minus
NOTE CONF
L + 1, it will again assign that to P2.
By the time it comes, the loop comes to P3,
NOTE CONF
this gets overwritten to P3.
So what it has done is if you hold sums
NOTE CONF
of Z suffix of some length, OK, let's say there
are multiple instances of Z suffix of some length, at
NOTE CONF
the end of the one single pass, it will always
store the endpoint of the rightmost instance of the good
NOTE CONF
suffix of that length.
Now, what happens when.
NOTE CONF
The Z suffix is 0 at some position.
Let's look at what happens when the Z suffix is
NOTE CONF
0.
What is J of M minus Z suffix of that
NOTE CONF
position plus 1?
M minus 0 + 1 is M + 1, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So when it's 0.
It has this extra cell, which is saying that what
NOTE CONF
is that useful for?
Why do I need an M +1 position?
NOTE CONF
Can a good suffix be null?
Can a good suffix be null in an iteration?
NOTE CONF
In an iteration, can it be null?
It can be null.
NOTE CONF
When it's null, the bad character would be the last
character that you've started.
NOTE CONF
So when that happens, it has a shift rule in
M + 1 position, because a good suffix is going
NOTE CONF
from.
It's basically saying that it starts at M + 1
NOTE CONF
and ends at M.
Whenever you have an interval where the start point exceeds
NOTE CONF
the endpoint by 1, it's a null interval.
That's a rule in, in In the mathematics of intervals,
NOTE CONF
right?
So when you have the start point greater than end
NOTE CONF
point, so M + 1 to M is the suffix,
if you choose that logic where z suffix is zero
NOTE CONF
when the interval being defined is pattern of m +
1 as a start point and m as An end
NOTE CONF
point, it's absurd as an interval because how can the
start point be greater than end point, but what it,
NOTE CONF
it is consistent with the mathematics of it because it
defines the length of as endpoint minus start point plus
NOTE CONF
1 end point is M start point is M +
1 minus 1 is of length zero.
NOTE CONF
So essentially what this logic is doing is computing the
Z um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, good suffix values, and once you do the good
suffix values, so here's the, um, uh.
NOTE CONF
The example you could self-study this, but what you've done
is I'm claiming that for this uh uh pattern, if
NOTE CONF
you reverse this pattern, run the Z algorithm and reverse
back the Z array, this is what you would end
NOTE CONF
up getting.
OK?
NOTE CONF
Now.
So now what you have here is that Um, at
NOTE CONF
this stage, once you're finished the first part of the,
um, The initialization part of that algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Once you have finished this part of the algorithm, you
have initialised everything to zeros.
NOTE CONF
Reme know that there's a dummy, the last M+1 cell
at position 12, which is the fact that you're using.
NOTE CONF
M + 1, an array of length M + 1.
By the way, if you don't want an M +1,
NOTE CONF
then you will have to explicitly have if Z suffix
of P is greater than 0, that logic else you
NOTE CONF
basically have to say that you don't have to fill
anything else.
NOTE CONF
Thanks for What I'm sorry.
So I leave it as as dash because you don't
NOTE CONF
care, really don't care.
You should never ever have to use it.
NOTE CONF
But if you have to choose a value, a logical
value would be the length of the pattern.
NOTE CONF
I left it as dash because you don't shouldn't care
about it.
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
If your pattern is all the same letter, then the
NOTE CONF
suffix.
Zeros, right, because there's no suffix with a different character.
NOTE CONF
So if they're all A's, then the good suffix is
all zeros is because you're saying that, um, so there
NOTE CONF
is, it defaults to a match prefix.
The answer is sort of, sort of.
NOTE CONF
I, I, so if, if you did that, if you
actually um uh followed this logic, Uh, then Z suffix,
NOTE CONF
um, at M minus 1 position would be of length
M minus 1.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, so then you would have J equals M minus
M minus 1 + 1, which is basically 2.
NOTE CONF
So, at position 2, you would be storing the value
which is M minus 1.
NOTE CONF
So, yeah, I think that's, I, I did it in
my head, but it will have a value out there.
NOTE CONF
Now it just so, so happens that um.
We'll, we'll have to work this out quietly, quiet from
NOTE CONF
pencil paper.
It's a specific instance, then I just have to figure,
NOTE CONF
so there are, there's no corner case in, in that
thinking.
NOTE CONF
I don't think the, the preceding character would have a,
have an issue there, but it will be consistent to
NOTE CONF
what the definition of a Z suffix of I would
be.
NOTE CONF
I'll have to quietly sit down and look, stare at
a paper to figure out what that instance will manifest
NOTE CONF
as.
All right, so once you run this, um, once you
NOTE CONF
run this logic for this specific, uh, string, once you
run this logic, So you would, um, you would see
NOTE CONF
that.
Um You would have these values fill out in your
NOTE CONF
good suffix.
Now, really, if you look at So those are Z
NOTE CONF
boxes, so they're the the longest substring.
Ending at that position that matches the suffix for of
NOTE CONF
length one is what I'm drawing here.
Um, then.
NOTE CONF
Then that would be 9.
So What you would end up computing for these Z
NOTE CONF
boxes would be J equals M minus the length.
Uh, plus 1, which would be M in this case
NOTE CONF
because they're off length 1, so M is 117.
So if you look when P is here, this would
NOTE CONF
have been 1, when P is 3, this would have
been 3.
NOTE CONF
When when P reaches 9, this changes to 9.
So you're overwriting it.
NOTE CONF
So for any length you always store the rightmost occurrence
of any goods, uh, any.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, good suffix, the end point of the, any
good suffix in the pattern.
NOTE CONF
So just check, it'll take this will, if anything, this
will require some amount of quiet thinking to understand that
NOTE CONF
this actually is computing the end point of the rightmost
occurrence.
NOTE CONF
If you don't understand it immediately, I think it's simple
enough to spend some time to see if you can
NOTE CONF
digest it.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Just to make sure I understand, so do we do
this compute every time.
NOTE CONF
No, so this is, if you can see, this is
a function of.
NOTE CONF
A pattern, and you've computed this once at the start.
And then for any possible, when goods of exchanges, You
NOTE CONF
have a mismatch at position K, which means that you
have K + 1 to M that defines the good
NOTE CONF
suffix.
Then you look up the good suffix of K +
NOTE CONF
1 to find out the rightmost occurrence precomputed.
You've already pre-computed it.
NOTE CONF
So for varying values of K, you can look up
this array and tell what is the endpoint of the
NOTE CONF
rightmost occurrence of the good suffix in the pattern.
And that is 01 lookup after preprocessing.
NOTE CONF
And this actually is this algorithm runs in OM time,
right?
NOTE CONF
So Z suffix values is OM, this loop is OM,
so that is a linear time computation at the start.
NOTE CONF
And often the patterns are small, text is the ginormous
thing.
NOTE CONF
So it's a very fast computation at the start of
the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Now, so which this done.
Uh, yes, sir, I'll just be with you.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, go on.
OK.
NOTE CONF
If it's longer, I'll probably do it offline, but yeah.
So, I, OK, why, why is the good suffix value,
NOTE CONF
very good question, actually, thanks for asking.
What is, why is the good suffix value at 12:10?
NOTE CONF
It is the M + 1 value.
They all correspond correspond to values of the z suffixes,
NOTE CONF
which are zeros.
When it is 0, m minus.
NOTE CONF
Z suffix of that position, which is 0 + 1
would be M + 1.
NOTE CONF
So initially when P is Is there this would be
2.
NOTE CONF
When P is 4, this becomes 4.
When P is 6, this becomes 6.
NOTE CONF
When P is 8, this becomes 8.
Last would be when P equals 10, it becomes 10.
NOTE CONF
In fact, it will, it'll stop at the value of
a character that is not the last character, because good
NOTE CONF
suffix of null implies the bad character was the last
character, right?
NOTE CONF
So if the back character was the last character, on
the pattern, you see, let's say A, it has to
NOTE CONF
be some character not equals A.
OK, because it's always a good suffix preceded by a
NOTE CONF
character that's not the same as what you've seen in
the pattern.
NOTE CONF
The good suffix is null, what you've seen is A,
then it's some, what is the other place where you've
NOTE CONF
seen a character that's not A?
What's the rightmost occurrence of it, that's why it's storing
NOTE CONF
10.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So, when you have, so this answers your question, where
you said, how does it work?
NOTE CONF
The mechanics is that you do an iteration, you identify
a K, you have, you, that kind of gives you
NOTE CONF
a good suffix of K + 1 to M.
You just look up this value, and that will be
NOTE CONF
pointing to some position P.
Then you have to shift by M minus P, which
NOTE CONF
is, which is what you're closing the gap.
That's what you end up getting that shifting.
NOTE CONF
Now, this is, seems.
Uh, a suggestion, so a good suffix is shift by
NOTE CONF
those many positions.
There's still a little more things to worry about now.
NOTE CONF
I want you to focus on this example.
What would be good suffix of 6 in that example?
NOTE CONF
So good suffix is that green bit, right?
It starts at 6, ends at 11.
NOTE CONF
That's the region of the pattern.
Do you see any other instance of that substring in
NOTE CONF
the pattern?
Where The same, but it is not.
NOTE CONF
So B A C A B A is the good
suffix.
NOTE CONF
Do you see any other?
Um, instance of B A C A BA in the
NOTE CONF
pattern.
The answer is no, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
What do we do here?
Shift by Shift across Is shifting across safe?
NOTE CONF
Look at the example carefully.
OK.
NOTE CONF
If you shift past the pattern, the idea would be
it's when, so here's a case where good suffix of
NOTE CONF
K + 1 is 00 in one base indexing means
that I have not found any rightmost occurrence of another
NOTE CONF
instance of the goods.
In the pattern when it is 0, it is not
NOTE CONF
safe to shift it past the end point.
The reason is that some part of the good suffix
NOTE CONF
could match the prefix of the pattern.
So let's take a look.
NOTE CONF
Example Do you see that there's this part that matches?
Now I have to make sure that my shift has
NOTE CONF
to be That way, that way, so that the blue
bits match.
NOTE CONF
So when good suffix of K + 1 is equal
to 0, then.
NOTE CONF
What we are doing there is Don't simply say shift
across, shift by M minus good suffix of K +
NOTE CONF
1, which would mean shift by M positions if good
suffix of K + 1 is 0.
NOTE CONF
It says, is there any suffix of that good suffix
that matches the prefix, mouthful, right?
NOTE CONF
Is there a suffix to prefix matching?
So can you see that this ACABA matches this ACABA
NOTE CONF
at that position 6, what is the longest suffix of
6 to 11 that matches the prefix?
NOTE CONF
It is a.
It is a suffix, a proper suffix of length 5,
NOTE CONF
isn't it?
A C A B A visuallyVC matches the um matches
NOTE CONF
the uh prefix.
So now there is an additional data structure, which is
NOTE CONF
what I mentioned at the start called match prefix that
you need to pre-process again.
NOTE CONF
Its processing is simple using algorithm.
All you need to do is understand what these definitions
NOTE CONF
are and understand what that algorithm does, and it'll become
as clear as daylight.
NOTE CONF
So what we're trying to do is for any position
for any possible good suffix of any length, if the
NOTE CONF
good suffix is not found, if.
The good suffix of K + 1 to M, that's
NOTE CONF
good suffix of K + 1, is basically 0, then
find the longest suffix in that region, K + 1
NOTE CONF
to M, that matches the prefix for that.
You could preprocess another data structure using z values.
NOTE CONF
In fact, we've already computed Z values as a part
of um Z suffix array.
NOTE CONF
You can use the suffix prefix matching or prefix suffix
matching, whether you do it in the forward Z algorithm
NOTE CONF
or the backward Z algorithm.
It is essentially the same because it's a relationship between
NOTE CONF
a suffix and a prefix.
Now, I just want to spend some time on the
NOTE CONF
board here and ask a question.
So if I have Um, if I have a pattern
NOTE CONF
1 to M, I have a bunch of Z boxes.
Which Z box should I, should I care about?
NOTE CONF
OK, sorry, I have 1 to M.
And a bunch of Z boxes at various positions.
NOTE CONF
So I'm, I'm using the ending.
Um, maybe I will lose the starting here.
NOTE CONF
It makes sense because I'm doing it in the forward
direction.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't matter whether you use ZI values or Z
suffix values, it's exactly the same.
NOTE CONF
So here, the relationship is substring starting at every position
that matches the prefixes.
NOTE CONF
If I have to define a relationship between suffix and
prefix, which Z boxes am I interested in?
NOTE CONF
I know that the boxes match the prefix, but I
want a relationship between suffix and a prefix.
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
So the ones ending at M, so you're only interested
NOTE CONF
in the Z boxes that end ending at M.
So you can actually compute.
NOTE CONF
The Longest suffix of the good suffix.
So good suffix is basically starting from K + 1
NOTE CONF
to M.
You want to find out the longest suffix of the
NOTE CONF
good suffix that matches the prefix using the Z boxes
that.
NOTE CONF
whose information will give you the relationship between suffix and
prefix.
NOTE CONF
So this is your question.
I want you to think about an algorithm that computes
NOTE CONF
for any possible good suffix of any length.
It's going to give you the longest.
NOTE CONF
Um, suffix of the good suffix that matches the prefix,
OK?
NOTE CONF
Suffix of the good suffix that matches the prefix.
If you pay attention to the, um, uh, definition, it
NOTE CONF
becomes a bit more clearer.
OK?
NOTE CONF
Just pay some, some more attention to what I have
said and see if you can come up with a
NOTE CONF
linear time algorithm which requires nothing more than Zi values
or Z suffix of i values, whether you do it
NOTE CONF
forward.
Relationship between suffix and prefix or prefix and suffix, it's
NOTE CONF
the same thing.
OK?
NOTE CONF
So come up with an OMT algorithm to compute this.
Even if it's not clear now, spend some time, come
NOTE CONF
to the help desk, we'll flush, flesh it out.
If that's not clear, you still have a chance to
NOTE CONF
come to the 2nd help desk session on Thursday.
If that's not still not clear, you can go to
NOTE CONF
the labs and have it all sorted.
So you have few attempts at it.
NOTE CONF
So it'll be a fun thing to do.
Don't use Gen AI to solve this.
NOTE CONF
It'll be such a waste of our thinking.
OK, so The, the matched um prefix of any position.
NOTE CONF
OK.
OK, let's, let's take a position 2.
NOTE CONF
OK, let's take the position 2 here.
In this example, What would be the Longest suffix of
NOTE CONF
2 tom that matches the prefix, just visually.
The pattern 2 to M.
NOTE CONF
What is the longest suffix of The So what's the
longest proper suffix of 2M that matches the prefix, yeah?
NOTE CONF
Of what, what's the length?
It, it says 5, but are you convinced that it's
NOTE CONF
5?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
A CBA any other.
NOTE CONF
Suffix of 2 to 11 will not match the prefix
except for A C A B A.
NOTE CONF
OK, that's the longest.
So what the match prefix is going to store would
NOTE CONF
be um would be those, those values.
Now you can actually see some sort of a pattern.
NOTE CONF
Emerging from the numbers that you see, but I'll let
you think about how you can get these, um, values
NOTE CONF
from Z suffix, um, this row, OK?
Figure out how that, that's possible with the clue that
NOTE CONF
one of your peers has just said that any Z
box ending, um, so by the way, if you're using
NOTE CONF
Z suffix.
You, you have a Z suffix starting at a pos,
NOTE CONF
so it, it ends at a position.
Z suffix 5 gives you the ending point.
NOTE CONF
You have to compute the start point and the start
point should go all the way to the prefix side.
NOTE CONF
So it's a relationship with if you're using Z suffix,
you have to, it's a relationship with the prefix.
NOTE CONF
If you're doing Zi values, it's a relationship with the
suffix, right?
NOTE CONF
So that's how you kind of have to reason this,
um, because what you want to find is the ZI
NOTE CONF
box that reaches all the way to.
That matches the prefix in the in the forward sense
NOTE CONF
in the in the in the suffix sense you would
say what is the um longest substring ending at a
NOTE CONF
position that reaches the prefix that matches the suffix.
So you're essentially trying to find a relationship which is
NOTE CONF
equivalent.
OK, so with this, I understand that good suffix would
NOTE CONF
be unclear still, but you get the broad idea, don't
know the details, perfectly fine, and math prefix would be
NOTE CONF
fuzzy, but not clear, but you generally get an idea
that there are two shift functions that we, that we
NOTE CONF
are using here.
One is when the good suffix is actually a position,
NOTE CONF
when you actually find a position in the pattern, you
shift by M minus good suffix of K + 1.
NOTE CONF
If you don't find that, you're saying shift by M
minus match prefix of K + 1, OK?
NOTE CONF
So you're essentially doing um.
If good suffix of K + 1.
NOTE CONF
Is greater than 0 in 1-based indexing, then you're shifting
by M minus good suffix of K + 1.
NOTE CONF
If good suffix of K + 1 equals 0, then
you're saying shift by M minus match prefix of K
NOTE CONF
+ 1.
Now, So now we have Bad character shift, which is
NOTE CONF
K minus RK of X, let's say we're using extended
back character rule.
NOTE CONF
So bad character is giving you this good suffix shift
rule, depending on what the case is, is giving you
NOTE CONF
one of these two things.
You get some numbers.
NOTE CONF
Let's call this number shift by that amount, and this
one is giving you a shift by good suffix, whatever
NOTE CONF
the good.
You, you only use one of these two, and it's
NOTE CONF
giving you some number.
So what would you do in, in general, in general,
NOTE CONF
what you do is.
You choose, uh, we choose the maximum of these two.
NOTE CONF
So you say max of.
As bad character and good surfing, shift, whatever the shift
NOTE CONF
functions are suggesting, you shift by.
So we kind of covered almost everything except a few
NOTE CONF
loose ends.
What happens when you find the entire pattern?
NOTE CONF
In a region from J to J + M M
minus 1, and you find the whole thing.
NOTE CONF
What do you do?
Shift by one OK, look at the example there.
NOTE CONF
What do you shift by?
So, but shift by the entire pattern.
NOTE CONF
Is that safe?
Pattern shift by M is a suggestion.
NOTE CONF
Is that safe?
Can you see that?
NOTE CONF
There is this small.
A B A A B A, uh, starting at this
NOTE CONF
position, I will show you again.
Let's say that is BA.
NOTE CONF
That matches exactly with the pattern.
If you shift by.
NOTE CONF
The whole M, you've missed something.
You potentially could miss something, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So What is that part?
Is that part?
NOTE CONF
A suffix of the pattern.
Which is the same as the prefix.
NOTE CONF
So, in fact, when the whole thing matches, it says,
Shift by matched prefix of 2.
NOTE CONF
The reason is that if you have Match prefix of
2, it defines the pattern.
NOTE CONF
So, batch prefix of 2, it's saying what is the
what are the suff suffix, what are the suffixes from
NOTE CONF
2 to 14 that matches the prefix 1 to 1
to 13.
NOTE CONF
What are, what are, what are the longest, uh, suffix
of 2 to 14 that matches the prefix of 1
NOTE CONF
to 13?
And it basically, in this example, it happens to be
NOTE CONF
5.
OK, so when you have computed pre-computed match prefix, you
NOTE CONF
already have a rule in place for a full match.
When it's a full match, you always have to shift
NOTE CONF
by M minus match prefix of the second position.
In one base indexing, it's 2, in zero base indexing
NOTE CONF
it's 1.
2nd position would be 01.
NOTE CONF
So all you have to do is shift by match
prefix of 2.
NOTE CONF
So they are essentially, um, the final rule that.
Sort of puts the end to the algorithm that when
NOTE CONF
you find the whole instance matching shift by M minus
match prefix of 2, when it doesn't match, you have
NOTE CONF
a bad character suggesting a shift, a good suffix rule
suggesting a shift.
NOTE CONF
Depending on one of those two cases, and then you
take the maximum of the two and shift.
NOTE CONF
So if I bring the pieces together.
That would be the whole of the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Now, If you did not, um, if you implemented this
thing.
NOTE CONF
As I described it, Without a simple optimisation, which is
in the field is called Galile's optimisation, but I call
NOTE CONF
it optimisation because I don't think it needs a name.
It's an obvious optimisation which any one of us could
NOTE CONF
have done.
If we were writing the code.
NOTE CONF
OK.
Although it, it so happened that Galil published a paper
NOTE CONF
15 years after the algorithm was, um, Was invented, OK?
So what is this optimisation?
NOTE CONF
If you do not use this optimisation, this will actually
run quadratic time, not uh linear.
NOTE CONF
So what would be the optimisation is quite simple.
Um So, uh, to bring the pieces, I'll first, this
NOTE CONF
is what I've already said, so we have, we have
to, to talk about the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
You have to do the pre-processing, compute the back character,
one of those, um, back character data structures, good suffix
NOTE CONF
data structures, and match prefixed data structures, the three data
structures that you do.
NOTE CONF
And you do right to left scanning starting from the
leftmost ends of pattern and text and then if the
NOTE CONF
whole thing um matches, then you do the match pref
what the uh m minus match prefix of two shifting.
NOTE CONF
If the pattern is not found, you take the best
of the two shifts as the shift to do.
NOTE CONF
But to fully optimise the algorithm, you have to apply
a simple optimisation.
NOTE CONF
In good suffix shifting, and this is very, very obvious,
we shifted.
NOTE CONF
So that these line up.
Correct?
NOTE CONF
When, so, now, in the next iteration, you have to
do right to left scanning, which compares this.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume that you come all the way to the
point where you know that this region matches that region.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to recompare the characters in that region.
You know you've shifted because the good good suffixes.
NOTE CONF
Because a good suffix shift is offering the alphas to
be the same.
NOTE CONF
So when you do a right to left scan, you
don't have to recomute um alpha.
NOTE CONF
Now, I'll give you one simple example of a case.
Involving full occurrence.
NOTE CONF
So let's take a simple case.
Where if you had Um, So we'll probably not be
NOTE CONF
able to cover Knuth Morris Pratt, but it was such
a simple algorithm.
NOTE CONF
I'll leave the slides non-examinable on the slide.
You just basically, uh, it's, it's such a simple algorithm
NOTE CONF
that if you have understood boy more than KMP would
be 5 minutes to understand, OK.
NOTE CONF
But because time has run out, I'd rather spend, um,
Final finalising this part.
NOTE CONF
Let's say there's some region of the text like that,
and there is Now, can you suggest, this is actually
NOTE CONF
when you did the matching?
The whole thing matched.
NOTE CONF
So when the pattern was found shift by Uh, M
minus match prefix of 2.
NOTE CONF
Tell me 12343 times.
So 12, that 12, that's 1 to 12.
NOTE CONF
M is 12, what is match prefix of 2?
What's the longest suffix of 2 to 12 that matches
NOTE CONF
the prefix?
8, so M prefix is 8.
NOTE CONF
So M minus 16, this will be 12 minus 8,
which will be 4 shift by 4.
NOTE CONF
So if I shift by 41234, now I will have
A B C D A B C D A B
NOTE CONF
C D.
Now, remember, you shifted so that that region matched with
NOTE CONF
that region, right?
That's what this is.
NOTE CONF
Now when you do a right to left scan this
match this match this match this match, you don't have
NOTE CONF
to match this all over again you're guaranteed to match.
This is like the extreme case where the good suffix
NOTE CONF
in this case in match prefix is basically ending all
the way to the start, but in general, if you
NOTE CONF
were doing a good suffix rule, there could only be
a partial region.
NOTE CONF
That starts at some position, ends at some positions after
shifting, if you're in the next iteration, your, uh, scanning
NOTE CONF
reaches P +1, so M to P +1, you've done
explicitly backwards, right to left scan.
NOTE CONF
P2, that position is free.
You don't have to scan.
NOTE CONF
You have to go to the next character and start
scanning.
NOTE CONF
Until the start, so essentially if you did this optimisation
then you can actually prove, and the proof is extremely
NOTE CONF
one of the most difficult proofs that there's a whole
chapter in the Gus Field's book about, about, um about
NOTE CONF
actually proving I think prove prove mathematically proving that this
is provably.
NOTE CONF
Uh, linear, but intuitively, you can see in pathological cases
where we have periodic strings.
NOTE CONF
So usually pathological cases manifest when there are a lot
of repeats.
NOTE CONF
You can actually see that if you were, if all
of these were A's, for instance, OK, or all of
NOTE CONF
these A, if all of them are A's, the period
is 1.
NOTE CONF
If all of them are A B A B A
B period is 2, here's a period 4 string, you
NOTE CONF
would essentially be only every time you're shifting, you're only
doing 4 extra comparisons.
NOTE CONF
4 is a period here for extra comparisons.
So and that will only go on until the end
NOTE CONF
of the string.
So the complexity would be bounded by of n after
NOTE CONF
doing an preprocessing.
Preprocessing gives you the data structures.
NOTE CONF
Shifting would be worst case.
Now in reality you're shifting on average by by a
NOTE CONF
function that's by.
Uh, order M amounts over, over a string of order
NOTE CONF
N.
So in reality, on average it runs as N over
NOTE CONF
M.
There's a proof by Coles.
NOTE CONF
Richard Coles writes, wrote this proofs in it took, took
over 15 years for people to prove that it is
NOTE CONF
in all possible cases it is running in linear time.
The proof is a bit convoluted.
NOTE CONF
There are parts of it which is pretty hairy as
well.
NOTE CONF
It's a well known hairy proof, but we're not, at
least for this instance, we'll not worry about the Cole's
NOTE CONF
proof.
We'll take it as given that this is actually worst
NOTE CONF
case N plus M, but you can really empirically verify.
What I'm saying is correct or not on your computer.
NOTE CONF
OK, I will end here.
Any questions?
NOTE CONF
Don't give up.
I know a lot of stuff being said, but don't
NOTE CONF
give up.
Just discuss with me if there's anything you're stuck.
NOTE CONF
It'll be a small wrinkle, and then it'll become clear,
OK?
NOTE CONF
So have that engagement and things will be clear.
Hi Let your recordings be off.
NOTE CONF
Yes, when will they be off?
I think they should be up almost immediately, actually, because
NOTE CONF
I may want to rewatch it.
Yeah, yeah, I think there are parts that might not
NOTE CONF
be clear, but at least the gistist, did you get
it?
NOTE CONF
I mean, I think it's only the devil in the
detail.
NOTE CONF
I think like the, the prefix and like I think
like the good suffix earlier, yeah, but you can come
NOTE CONF
to the help desk session.
We'll take an example and we'll work out if there's.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Shall we go out and have a Uh, and I
NOTE CONF
will also clear.
All right, I'll be outside.
NOTE CONF
It's like uh.
Yeah Oh shit, I, yeah, I.
NOTE CONF
Jesus Uh, it's a So, but It's just it's just,
uh, just.
NOTE CONF
You know Um, It's legit.
I just Oh, you have.
NOTE CONF
They they may be against each other.
it's like.
NOTE CONF
We